Title: Sugar-sweetened beverage consumption and weight gain in children and adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials.

Source: Am J Clin Nutr. 2023 Jan;117(1):160-174. doi: 10.1016/j.ajcnut.2022.11.008. Epub 2022 Dec 20. PMID: 36789935.

The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 117 (2023) 160-174 Sugar-sweetened beverage consumption and weight gain in children and adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials Michelle Nguyen 1, Sarah E. Jarvis 1, Maria G. Tinajero 1, Jiayue Yu 2, Laura Chiavaroli 1,3, Sonia Blanco Mejia 1,3, Tauseef A. Khan 1,3, Deirdre K. Tobias 4,5, Walter C. Willett 4,6, Frank B. Hu 4,6,7, Anthony J. Hanley 1,8,9, Catherine S. Birken 1,10,11, John L. Sievenpiper 1,3,12,13,14, Vasanti S. Malik 1,4,* 1 Department of Nutritional Sciences, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2 Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3 Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis & Clinical Trials Unit, Clinical Nutrition and Risk Factor Modification Centre, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; 4 Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA; 5 Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 6 Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA; 7 Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 8 Division of Endocrinology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 9 Leadership Sinai Centre for Diabetes, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; 10 Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 11 Child Health Evaluative Sciences, SickKids Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada; 12 Division of Endocrinology & Metabolism, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; 13 Department of Medicine, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON Canada; 14 Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada ABSTRACT Background: Sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) have been implicated in fueling the obesity epidemic. Objectives: This study aimed to update a synthesis of the evidence on SSBs and weight gain in children and adults. Methods: MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane databases were searched through September 8, 2022, for prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that evaluated intake of SSBs in relation to BMI and body weight in children and adults, respectively. Eligible interventions were compared against a noncaloric control. Study-level estimates were pooled using random-effects meta-analysis and presented as -coefficients with 95% CIs for cohorts and weighted mean differences (MDs) with 95% CIs for RCTs. Results: We identified 85 articles including 48 in children (40 cohorts, n - 91,713; 8 RCTs, n - 2783) and 37 in adults (21 cohorts, n - 448,661; 16 RCTs, n - 1343). Among cohort studies, each serving/day increase in SSB intake was associated with a 0.07-kg/m2 (95% CI: 0.04 kg/m2, 0.10 kg/m2) higher BMI in children and a 0.42-kg (95% CI: 0.26 kg, 0.58 kg) higher body weight in adults. RCTs in children indicated less BMI gain with SSB reduction interventions compared with control (MD: -0.21 kg/m2; 95% CI: -0.40 kg/m2, -0.01 kg/m2). In adults, randomization to addition of SSBs to the diet led to greater body weight gain (MD: 0.83 kg; 95% CI: 0.47 kg, 1.19 kg), and subtraction of SSBs led to weight loss (MD: -0.49 kg; 95% CI: -0.66 kg, -0.32 kg) compared with the control groups. A positive linear dose-response association between SSB consumption and weight gain was found in all outcomes assessed. Conclusions: Our updated systematic review and meta-analysis expands on prior evidence to confirm that SSB consumption promotes higher BMI and body weight in both children and adults, underscoring the importance of dietary guidance and public policy strategies to limit intake. This meta-analysis was registered at the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews as CRD42020209915. Keywords: sugar-sweetened beverage, obesity, weight gain, systematic review, meta-analysis Abbreviations used: BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence interval; FFQ, food frequency questionnaire; HFCS, high-fructose corn syrup; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment Development and Evaluation; MD, mean difference; NOS, Newcastle-Ottawa Scale; RCT, randomized controlled trial; SD, standard deviation; SE, standard error; SSB, sugar-sweetened beverage. DKT is Academic Editor of The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and did not have any role in the review of this paper. * Address correspondence to. E-mail address: vasanti.malik@utoronto.ca (V.S. Malik). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajcnut.2022.11.008 Received 12 July 2022; Received in revised form 2 November 2022; Accepted 10 November 2022 Available online 20 December 2022 0002-9165/- 2022 American Society for Nutrition. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. M. Nguyen et al. Introduction Despite current public health efforts, obesity has become a global epidemic. Among health risks, excess body weight continues to have the highest rate of increase worldwide [1]. In 2016, an estimated 1.9 billion adults were classified as being overweight, and 650 million adults were classified as being obese, accounting for ~4 million deaths [2, 3]. Alarmingly, the rate of increase in obesity among children and adolescence has surpassed that of adults [1]. The prevalence of childhood obesity has increased more than 4-fold globally since 1975 [3]. This is of particular concern as children with obesity are more likely to have obesity in adulthood, along with associated cardiometabolic and other health risks. Overweight and obesity are important risk factors for noncommunicable diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and some types of cancer, which have been found to have similar increases in prevalence [4, 5]. Concurrent with the obesity epidemic has been the overconsumption of sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) [6]. SSBs, which include sodas, fruit drinks, sports drinks, and energy drinks, are high in caloric sweeteners, including sucrose and high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS). These beverages contribute to high amounts of empty calories, as they are energy dense yet offer no other nutritional value. SSBs are the largest source of added sugar in the North American diet, and despite reductions in intake over the past decade, consumption remains high [7-10]. For these reasons, intake of SSBs has been implicated as an important contributor to overweight and obesity across the globe. Our previous systematic review and meta-analysis through March 2013 found consistent evidence from cohort studies and trials linking intake of SSBs to excess adiposity [11]. Over the past decade since, additional large prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been conducted. This further evidence needs to be incorporated into summaries of literature to inform policies, update guidelines, and support clinicians to make evidence-based recommendations about SSBs. Therefore, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to update the evidence on SSB intake in relation to change in adiposity in children and adults. Additionally, we have expanded the scope of this meta-analysis to include a novel dose-response analysis to further inform SSB guidance. Methods Protocol and registration We followed the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions [12] to conduct this systematic review and meta-analysis. Results are reported in compliance with the Meta-analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology guidelines [13] for prospective cohort studies and the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines [14] for RCTs. The study protocol was prospectively registered at the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (ID: CRD42020209915). Search strategy and study selection We searched MEDLINE, Embase, and Cochrane databases using the search terms presented in Supplemental Table 1. A manual search through databases and reference lists was additionally conducted. Searches were performed through September 8, 2022. Our review included prospective cohort studies and RCTs reporting associations for SSB consumption on weight gain in children and adolescents (aged <18 y) and adults (aged !18 y). We defined SSBs as The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 117 (2023) 160-174 beverages with added sugars, such as soft drinks and fruit drinks. We did not include 100% fruit juice in these analyses as we are conducting a separate meta-analysis on fruit juice and weight gain, and we considered noncaloric sweetened beverages as a comparator for RCTs. We included studies with a minimum duration of 6 mo for prospective cohort studies and 2 wk for RCTs as this is sufficient time to assess the outcomes of body weight and body mass index (BMI) gain. RCTs were eligible if the intervention added (i.e., addition trials) or subtracted (i.e., subtraction trials) SSB intake in adults or subtracted SSB intake in children. Only subtraction trials were included for children as no study has assessed the addition of SSB intake in children. Studies with a mixed intervention or those that combined SSBs with other foods, supplements, or lifestyle factors were excluded. Trials with isocaloric controls, such as fruit juices or milk, were additionally excluded because a mechanistic hypothesis is that SSBs contribute to weight gain by increasing energy intake. In studies with duplicate populations, the study with the largest sample size or that included a change versus change analysis was selected. No language restrictions were applied; however, only studies written in English or translated to English were considered. Titles and abstracts were screened, and relevant articles were reviewed by 2 independent reviewers (MN and SEJ or MGT). Discrepancies were resolved by consensus or discussion with the senior author (VSM). Data extraction and quality assessment At least 2 reviewers (MN and SEJ or MGT) independently extracted data from eligible studies including information on study characteristics (study design, sample size, blinding, duration, study setting, and covariates), participant characteristics (sex, age, disease status, and baseline body weight), dietary and outcome assessment methods, intervention or exposure, comparator, dose of SSB, funding source, and whether weight gain was the primary outcome. Data were extracted for the association of SSBs and body weight for adults or BMI for children. We did not evaluate the relation between waist circumference and SSBs because the outcomes of body weight and BMI can be more directly translated into public health recommendations and are more easily understood by the general public. For prospective cohort studies, multivariable-adjusted -coefficients and the standard errors (SEs) were extracted (see Supplemental Table 2). Because of the potential mediation of total energy intake on the association between SSBs and weight gain, we extracted data with and without adjustments for total energy when possible. For RCTs, the change from baseline differences for the intervention and control groups were extracted as means - standard deviations (SDs). If unavailable, they were derived from available data using published formulas [12]. For trials with multiple comparator interventions, we chose the control most relevant to our research question; for example, in studies comparing SSBs with water or a diet beverage, we chose the control of a diet beverage because of public health relevance. The authors were contacted to provide additional outcome or study details. In studies where data were presented graphically and numerical values were not available, Plot Digitizer V.2.6.9 was used. The risk of bias for each study was assessed by 2 independent reviewers. For prospective cohort studies, we used the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) [15] to assign points according to 3 domains: 1) selection, 2) comparability, and 3) exposure. A maximum of 9 points could be awarded, and studies with a score of !6 points were considered to be of high quality. For RCTs, the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool [12] was used to assign a "high risk," "unclear risk," or "low risk" according to 5 domains: 1) sequence generation, 2) M. Nguyen et al. allocation concealment, 3) blinding, 4) incomplete outcome data, and 5) selective outcome reporting. Data synthesis and analysis Because of the variation in presented data for a number of studies, it was necessary to perform various transformations in the outcome data to obtain uniform units. The details of the transformations are shown in Supplemental Table 2. For prospective cohort studies in children, our primary analysis assessed the change in BMI (kg/m2) per every 12-oz serving/d increment of SSB during the duration specified in each study. Studies that reported SSBs in servings other than 12 oz [16-23], in grams [24-35], or in energy units [36, 37] were scaled accordingly (see Supplemental Table 2). In studies where the serving size was not specified, it was assumed to be 12 oz [38-52], which is equivalent to ~355 mL and typical for most glasses and cans. Studies that reported servings per week were converted to servings per day [20, 38, 43, 46, 49, 53]. Studies with effect estimates presented as BMI z-score [16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 25, 28, 31, 33, 35-37, 40, 47-50, 54,55] were converted to BMI using the lambda-mu-sigma method [56], and studies that reported changes in fat mass were converted to BMI [19], making the assumption that differences in fat mass were equal to differences in body weight. Studies that reported effect estimates in at least 3 categories [20, 21, 34, 37, 38, 46-51] were converted to continuous variables by plotting the median intake of each group against weight change and using least squares linear regression to obtain the and SE, with the assumption of linearity. Several studies reported the change in SSB intake in relation to change in BMI [18, 24, 27, 36-39, 41-44, 46, 54, 55]. A change versus change meta-analysis was conducted separately and scaled for the 1-y change in BMI per serving/day increment of SSB. Nonenergy intake-adjusted models were included in the primary meta-analysis when possible, and a separate meta-analysis was conducted that included energy-adjusted models. Additionally, because of the number of estimates presented as BMI z-score, we conducted a separate meta-analysis assessing the association of SSBs and BMI z-score. For prospective cohort studies in adults, our primary analysis assessed the change in body weight (kg) per every 12-oz serving/ d increment of SSB during the duration specified in each study. Similar transformations were performed to scale reported units to 12-oz/ d serving sizes [57-72] and from categorical to continuous data [62, 65, 71-74] (see Supplemental Table 2). Several studies reported the change in SSB intake in relation to change in body weight [57-61, 63-67, 69-71, 75, 76]; thus, a separate meta-analysis was conducted using these studies to show the 1-y change in weight per serving/day increment of SSB. An additional meta-analysis was conducted that included effect estimates that were adjusted for total energy. For RCTs in children, estimates were transformed to express the mean difference (MD) in BMI (kg/m2) change between the intervention and control groups. Two trials reported estimates as BMI z-score and were, thus, converted to BMI [77, 78]. For RCTs in adults, estimates were transformed to express the MD in body weight (kg) change between the intervention and control groups. When not provided directly, the differences between the end and baseline values of the intervention and control groups were calculated, and a standard formula was used to calculate the SD [12]. When calculating within-group differences and for crossover trials in pairwise analyses, a correlation coefficient of 0.95 was used to calculate the SD of the MD [79]. The correlation coefficient of 0.95 was used as the correlation between body weight at 2 time points was assumed to be high [11]. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 117 (2023) 160-174 Data analyses were conducted in Review Manager version 5.4 (The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration) and STATA version 16.1 (StataCorp). The - SE for the cohort studies and MD - SE for the RCTs were pooled for each outcome using the generic inverse-variance method with the DerSimonian and Laird randomeffects model. The fixed-effects models were also conducted and evaluated. Pooled results are expressed as -coefficients with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for prospective cohort studies and MD with 95% CIs for RCTs. Dose-response analysis was conducted for cohort studies and RCTs when !6 comparisons were available [80, 81]. Dose-response analysis was conducted for prospective cohort studies in children and adults to assess the change in BMI or body weight per 12-oz serving of SSB. The dose-response and primary analyses differed in the included studies and number of estimates based on how the models were calculated. We defined the dose of each category as the mean intake for the given group, and if not reported, we used the midpoint of the upper and lower bounds. For open-ended lower categories, we defined the dose as zero [82]. For open-ended upper categories, we added half of the category value to estimate the dose [82]. Dose-response estimates are reported as MDs against the reference category reported in each study. In studies where the categorical estimates were presented as means rather than MDs, we calculated the MD by subtracting each category against a reference group and used a standard equation to calculate the SE [12]. For cohort studies in adults, 2 studies reported negative doses as some groups indicated reduction in intakes [65, 67]. We excluded studies from the dose-response analysis for cohort studies that reported continuous outcomes, as nonlinear dose-response analyses could not be conducted. Dose-response analysis was additionally conducted for addition trials in adults using linear and nonlinear meta-regression. Dose-response analysis was not conducted for RCTs in children and subtraction trials in adults as these studies assessed the subtraction of SSBs from the diet and <6 comparisons with dose were available. We calculated the I2 statistic and P value for heterogeneity from the Cochrane Q statistic. An I2 ! 50% and P < 0.10 were considered to be indicative of substantial heterogeneity [12]. Potential sources of heterogeneity were explored through sensitivity and a priori selected subgroup analyses. A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the influence of individual studies by systematically removing each study from the meta-analysis and recalculating the pooled effect estimate and heterogeneity. The removal of any study that changed the direction or significance of the pooled effect or explained heterogeneity was considered an influential study. For outcomes with !10 observations, subgroup analyses were conducted to explore sources of heterogeneity using meta-regression (significance at P < 0.05). Subgroup analysis for prospective cohort studies included age (< median vs. ! median), baseline BMI for adults (<25 vs. !25 kg/m2), study duration (< median vs. ! median months), source of funding (agency, industry, agency-industry, none, and not reported), dietary assessment method [food frequency questionnaires (FFQs), 24-h dietary recall, and diet records], adjustment for diet quality, adjustment for energy intake, outcome assessment method (measured by investigators vs. self-report), study location (North America, Europe, Asia, South America, and Australia), and NOS (<6 vs. !6). Subgroup [...]
