Title: American Gut: an Open Platform for Citizen Science Microbiome Research.

Source: mSystems. 2018 May 15;3(3):e00031-18. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00031-18. eCollection 2018 May-Jun. PMID: 29795809.

American Gut: an Open Platform for Citizen Science Microbiome Research Daniel McDonald,a Embriette Hyde,a Justine W. Debelius,a James T. Morton,a Antonio Gonzalez,a Gail Ackermann,a Alexander A. Aksenov,b,c Bahar Behsaz,d Caitriona Brennan,a Yingfeng Chen,e Lindsay DeRight Goldasich,a Pieter C. Dorrestein,b,c Robert R. Dunn,f Ashkaan K. Fahimipour,g James Gaffney,a Jack A. Gilbert,h,i,j,k Grant Gogul,a Jessica L. Green,g Philip Hugenholtz,l Greg Humphrey,a Curtis Huttenhower,m,n Matthew A. Jackson,o Stefan Janssen,a Dilip V. Jeste,p,q Lingjing Jiang,a Scott T. Kelley,e Dan Knights,r,s Tomasz Kosciolek,a Joshua Ladau,t Jeff Leach,u Clarisse Marotz,a Dmitry Meleshko,v Alexey V. Melnik,b,c Jessica L. Metcalf,w Hosein Mohimani,x Emmanuel Montassier,r,y Jose Navas-Molina,a Tanya T. Nguyen,p,q Shyamal Peddada,z Pavel Pevzner,b,d,aa Katherine S. Pollard,t Gholamali Rahnavard,m,n Adam Robbins-Pianka,bb Naseer Sangwan,j Joshua Shorenstein,a Larry Smarr,d,aa,cc Se Jin Song,a Timothy Spector,o Austin D. Swafford,aa Varykina G. Thackray,dd Luke R. Thompson,ee,ff Anupriya Tripathi,a Yoshiki V-zquez-Baeza,a Alison Vrbanac,a Paul Wischmeyer,gg,hh Elaine Wolfe,a Qiyun Zhu,a The American Gut Consortium, Rob Knighta,d,aa aDepartment of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA bCollaborative Mass Spectrometry Innovation Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA cSkaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA dDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA eDepartment of Biology, San Diego State University, San Diego, California, USA fDepartment of Applied Ecology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA gBiology and the Built Environment Center, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, USA hDepartment of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA iInstitute for Genomic and Systems Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA jDepartment of Biosciences, Argonne National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois, USA kMarine Biology Laboratory, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA lAustralian Centre for Ecogenomics, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, the University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia mHarvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA nThe Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA oDepartment of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London, London, United Kingdom pDepartments of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA qSam and Rose Stein Institute for Research on Aging and Center for Healthy Aging, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA rDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA sBiotechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA tThe Gladstone Institutes, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA uHuman Food Project, Terlingua, Texas, USA vSt. Petersburg State University, Center for Algorithmic Biotechnology, Saint Petersburg, Russia wDepartment of Animal Science, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA xDepartment of Computational Biology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA yUniversit- de Nantes, Microbiotas Hosts Antibiotics and Bacterial Resistances (MiHAR), Nantes, France zDepartment of Biostatistics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA aaCenter for Microbiome Innovation, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA bbDepartment of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA ccCalifornia Institute for Telecommunications and Information Technology (Calit2), University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA May/June 2018 Volume 3 Issue 3 e00031-18 Received 8 March 2018 Accepted 16 April 2018 Published 15 May 2018 Citation McDonald D, Hyde E, Debelius JW, Morton JT, Gonzalez A, Ackermann G, Aksenov AA, Behsaz B, Brennan C, Chen Y, DeRight Goldasich L, Dorrestein PC, Dunn RR, Fahimipour AK, Gaffney J, Gilbert JA, Gogul G, Green JL, Hugenholtz P, Humphrey G, Huttenhower C, Jackson MA, Janssen S, Jeste DV, Jiang L, Kelley ST, Knights D, Kosciolek T, Ladau J, Leach J, Marotz C, Meleshko D, Melnik AV, Metcalf JL, Mohimani H, Montassier E, Navas-Molina J, Nguyen TT, Peddada S, Pevzner P, Pollard KS, Rahnavard G, Robbins-Pianka A, Sangwan N, Shorenstein J, Smarr L, Song SJ, Spector T, Swafford AD, Thackray VG, Thompson LR, Tripathi A, V-zquez-Baeza Y, Vrbanac A, Wischmeyer P, Wolfe E, Zhu Q, The American Gut Consortium, Knight R. 2018. American Gut: an open platform for citizen science microbiome research. mSystems 3: e00031-18. https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems .00031-18. Editor Casey S. Greene, University of Pennsylvania Copyright - 2018 McDonald et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license. Address correspondence to Rob Knight, robknight@ucsd.edu. D. McDonald and E. Hyde contributed equally to this work. For a commentary on this article, see https:// doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00060-18. American Gut: an Open Platform for Microbiome Research msystems.asm.org 1 McDonald et al. ddDepartment of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA eeOcean Chemistry and Ecosystems Division, Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, stationed at Southwest Fisheries Science Center, La Jolla, California, USA ffDepartment of Biological Sciences and Northern Gulf Institute, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, Mississippi, USA ggDepartment of Anesthesiology and Surgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA hhDuke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA ABSTRACT Although much work has linked the human microbiome to specific phenotypes and lifestyle variables, data from different projects have been challenging to integrate and the extent of microbial and molecular diversity in human stool remains unknown. Using standardized protocols from the Earth Microbiome Project and sample contributions from over 10,000 citizen-scientists, together with an open research network, we compare human microbiome specimens primarily from the United States, United Kingdom, and Australia to one another and to environmental samples. Our results show an unexpected range of beta-diversity in human stool microbiomes compared to environmental samples; demonstrate the utility of procedures for removing the effects of overgrowth during room-temperature shipping for revealing phenotype correlations; uncover new molecules and kinds of molecular communities in the human stool metabolome; and examine emergent associations among the microbiome, metabolome, and the diversity of plants that are consumed (rather than relying on reductive categorical variables such as veganism, which have little or no explanatory power). We also demonstrate the utility of the living data resource and cross-cohort comparison to confirm existing associations between the microbiome and psychiatric illness and to reveal the extent of microbiome change within one individual during surgery, providing a paradigm for open microbiome research and education. IMPORTANCE We show that a citizen science, self-selected cohort shipping samples through the mail at room temperature recaptures many known microbiome results from clinically collected cohorts and reveals new ones. Of particular interest is integrating n 1 study data with the population data, showing that the extent of microbiome change after events such as surgery can exceed differences between distinct environmental biomes, and the effect of diverse plants in the diet, which we confirm with untargeted metabolomics on hundreds of samples. KEYWORDS citizen science, microbiome The human microbiome plays a fundamental role in human health and disease. While many studies link microbiome composition to phenotypes, we lack understanding of the boundaries of bacterial diversity within the human population and the relative importance of lifestyle, health conditions, and diet to underpin precision medicine or to educate the broader community about this key aspect of human health. We launched the American Gut Project (AGP; http://americangut.org) in November 2012 as a collaboration between the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) (1) and the Human Food Project (HFP; http://humanfoodproject.com/) to discover the kinds of microbes and microbiomes "in the wild" via a self-selected citizen-scientist cohort. The EMP characterizes global microbial taxonomic and functional diversity, and the HFP focuses on understanding microbial diversity across human populations. As of May 2017, the AGP included microbial sequence data from 15,096 samples from 11,336 human participants, totaling over 467 million (48,599 unique) 16S rRNA V4 gene fragments (abbreviated 16S). Our project informs citizen-scientist participants about their own microbiomes by providing a standard report (Fig. 1A) and deposits all deidentified data into the public domain on an ongoing basis without access restric- May/June 2018 Volume 3 Issue 3 e00031-18 msystems.asm.org 2 American Gut: an Open Platform for Microbiome Research FIG 1 Population characteristics. (A) Participants across the world have sent in samples to American Gut, although the primary geographic regions of participation are in North America and the United Kingdom; the report that a participant receives is depicted. (B) The primary sample breakdown for subsequent analyses. Red denotes the reasons that samples were removed. (C) Between the two largest populations, the United States (n 6,634) and the United Kingdom (n 2,071), we observe a significant difference in alpha-diversity. (D) In a meta-analysis, the largely industrialized population that makes up American Gut exhibits significant differential abundances compared to nonindustrialized populations. tions (see Table S1 in the supplemental material). This reference database characterizes the diversity of the industrialized human gut microbiome on an unprecedented scale; reveals novel relationships with health, lifestyle, and dietary factors; and establishes the AGP resource and infrastructure as a living platform for discovery. RESULTS Cohort characteristics. AGP participants primarily reside in the United States (n 7,860). However, interest in the AGP rapidly expanded beyond the United States to the United Kingdom (n 2,518) and Australia (n 321), with 42 other countries or territories also represented (Fig. 1A; see also Table S1 in the supplemental material). Participants in the United States inhabit urban (n 7,317), rural (n 29), and mixed (n 98) communities (2010 U.S. Census data based on participant ZIP codes) and span greater ranges of age, race, and ethnicity than other large-scale microbiome projects (2-6). Using a survey modified from references 7 and 8, participants reported general health status, disease history, and lifestyle data (Table S2 and Text S1). In accordance with our institutional review board (IRB), all survey questions were optional (median per-question response, 70.9% [Table S2]). Additionally, 14.8% of participants completed May/June 2018 Volume 3 Issue 3 e00031-18 msystems.asm.org 3 McDonald et al. a validated picture-based food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) (VioScreen; http://www .viocare.com/vioscreen.html), and responses correlated well with primary survey diet responses (Table S2). We focused our primary investigative efforts on a "healthy adult" subset (n 3,942) of individuals aged 20 to 69 years with body mass indexes (BMIs) ranging between 18.5 and 30 kg/m2; no self-reported history of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), diabetes, or antibiotic use in the past year; and at least 1,250 16S sequences/sample (Fig. 1B and S1B). The two largest populations in the data set (United States and United Kingdom) differed significantly in alpha-diversity, with Faith's phylogenetic diversity (PD) higher in U.K. samples (9) (Mann-Whitney test P 1 1015) (Fig. 1C). One balance (10) (a log-ratio compositional transform) explained most of the taxonomic separation between U.S. and U.K. samples (area under the curve [AUC] 77.7%; analysis of variance [ANOVA] P 1.01 1078, F 386.85) (Fig. S1C and Table S3). To understand how these two populations differed from others, we compared adult AGP samples (predominantly from industrialized regions) to samples from adults living traditional lifestyles (6, 11, 12) (e.g., hunter-gatherer and remote agrarian populations). As previously observed (6), samples from industrial and traditional populations separated in principalcoordinate analysis (PCoA) space of unweighted UniFrac distances (13) (Fig. S1D). UniFrac is a formal distance metric (14) which computes a dissimilarity based on the amount of unique phylogenetic branch length between two samples. These distances show a greater variation within industrial populations than within traditional populations (2) and facile separation based on microbial taxonomy (industrial versus nonindustrial agrarian, AUC 98.9%; ANOVA P 1.52 10260, F 1,265.8; industrial versus hunter-gatherer, AUC 99.5%; ANOVA P 4.48 10227, F 1,092.35) (Fig. 1D and Table S3). Removal of bacterial blooms. An important practical question is whether selfcollected microbiome samples can match those from better-controlled studies. Most AGP samples are stools collected on dry swabs and shipped without preservative to minimize costs and avoid exposure to toxic preservatives. Escherichia coli and a few other taxa grow in transit, so based on data from controlled-storage studies as previously described (15), we removed sub-operational taxonomic units (sOTUs) (16) (median of 7.9% of sequences removed per sample) shown to bloom. We further characterized the impact of these organisms through culturing, highperformance liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) analysis of cultured isolates, and shotgun metagenomics of the primary samples and storage controls (15, 17). Culturing primary specimens stored at 80-C (United States, n 116; United Kingdom, n 73; other, n 25) showed a strong correlation between the fraction of sequences reported as blooms in 16S sequencing and positive microbial growth following overnight incubation under aerobic conditions (Fig. 2A). Culture supernatants were characterized using HPLC-MS; most metabolites in these supernatants were absent from the primary specimens (Fig. 2B; see method details in Text S1). We sequenced draft genomes of 169 isolates; of these, 65 contained the exact E. coli 16S sequence in the published bloom filter (15). To characterize the impact of the 16S filter for blooms used exactly as described in reference 15, we computed effect sizes over the participant covariates and technical parameters for 9,511 individual participant samples, including and excluding blooms (complete list in Table S2), and observed tight correlations for both unweighted (Fig. 2C) (Pearson r 0.91, P 3.76 1057; Spearman r 0.90, P 9.45 1055) and weighted (Fig. 2D) (Pearson r 0.42, P 1.71 106; Spearman r 0.58, P 1.03 109) UniFrac values, suggesting that the presence of the blooms does not substantially alter effect sizes of the study variables. An outlier on the quantitative metric (weighted UniFrac) is present and corresponds to a variable representing the fraction of bloom reads in a sample. In Text S1, we further compare the ranking of these effect sizes to reference 17. The filter for 16S blooms acts by removing exact sOTUs from the data set prior to rarefaction. This filter is applied to May/June 2018 Volume 3 Issue 3 e00031-18 msystems.asm.org 4 American Gut: an Open Platform for Microbiome Research FIG 2 Blooms and effect sizes. (A) The fraction of 16S reads that recruit to bloom reads defined by Amir et al. (15) is strongly associated with the likelihood for microbial growth under aerobic culture conditions on rich medium. (B) Overlap of mass spectral features (consensus MS/MS cluster nodes; see Materials and Methods, "Molecular networking") between AGP samples and blooms. (C) Unweighted UniFrac effect sizes. The inset shows the correlation of effect sizes when including or excluding the bloom 16S reads (Pearson r 0.91, P 3.76 1057). (D) Weighted UniFrac effect sizes. The inset shows the correlation of the effect sizes when including or excluding bloom 16S reads (Pearson r 0.42, P 1.71 106); the outlier is the 16S bloom fraction of the sample. all samples in the data set, including samples from other studies when performing meta-analyses. Novel taxa and microbiome configurations. To better understand human microbiome diversity, we placed AGP samples in the context of the EMP (1). Building on May/June 2018 Volume 3 Issue 3 e00031-18 msystems.asm.org 5 McDonald et al. FIG 3 OTU and beta-diversity novelty. (A) The AGP data placed into the context of extant microbial diversity at a global scale. (B) A phylogenetic tree showing the diversity spanned by the AGP and the HMP in the context of Greengenes and the EMP. (C and D) sOTU novelty over increasing numbers of samples in the AGP (C); the AGP appears to have begun to reach saturation and is contrasted with the data from the work of Yatsunenko et al. (6) (D), which, unlike the AGP, had extremely deep sequencing per sample. (E) The minimum observed UniFrac distance between samples over increasing numbers of samples for the AGP and the HMP; the inset is from 0 to 500 samples. (F) An AGP "trading card" of an sOTU of interest (shown in full in Fig. S2). earlier work that revealed a striking difference between host-associated and environmental microbiomes (18), we found that the distances between pairs of human gut microbiomes (just one body site in one vertebrate) are often comparable to the distances between completely different types of environments and that even the first two dimensions of a PCoA plot capture this intuition visually (Fig. 3A). This intuition is confirmed by PERMDISP (homogeneity of dispersion) analysis: on average, a randomly chosen AGP fecal sample was more likely to be close to the centroid of the AGP fecal distribution (distances in the range of 0.1 to 0.2) than a randomly chosen EMP sample and was less distant on average from the centroid overall (P 0.001, PERMDISP). However, the maximum distance from the centroid was greater for AGP than EMP (0.65 versus 0.58; no statistical analysis possible because this is a single value), matching the intuition from the PCoA plot that the dispersion of the AGP samples is large compared to individual environments and that the extremes of the spread are comparable to that of the EMP. Because the maximum distance from the centroid increases with the number of samples, this distance would have been expected to be greater for the EMP, which is a larger data set. Inserting the sOTU fragments of AGP and EMP samples into a Greengenes (19) reference phylogenetic tree using SAT--enabled Phylogenetic Placement (SEPP) (20) (Fig. 3B) showed that the AGP population harbored much broader microbial diversity, as measured by phylogenetic diversity, than the Human Microbiome Project (HMP) (5). May/June 2018 Volume 3 Issue 3 e00031-18 msystems.asm.org 6 American Gut: an Open Platform for Microbiome Research While the AGP vastly exceeds the phylogenetic diversity observed in the HMP (Faith's PD, 1,579.6 versus 338.2), both data sets are dwarfed by the breadth of bacterial and archaeal phylogenetic diversity in environmental samples (Faith's PD, 17,740.6). This result is expected based on the relative size of the data sets (HMP AGP EMP), as Faith's PD increases with sampling effort until the diversity of a habitat is saturated, which has not yet been achieved for any of these types of samples. We confirmed that these differences were statistically significant (P 0.001) by bootstrap resampling samples from each study, measuring the distances again, and examining the fraction of the time that the rank order of the PD of the studies differed from that reported (0 of 1,000 replicates). Examining sOTUs over increasing numbers of samples, we observed a reduction in the discovery rate of novel sOTUs starting around 3,000 samples, emphasizing the need for focused sampling efforts outside the present AGP population [...]
