Title: Alcohol use and burden for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016.

Source: Lancet. 2018 Sep 22;392(10152):1015-1035. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31310-2.

Alcohol use and burden for 195 countries and territories, 1990­2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016 GBD 2016 Alcohol Collaborators* Summary Background Alcohol use is a leading risk factor for death and disability, but its overall association with health remains complex given the possible protective effects of moderate alcohol consumption on some conditions. With our comprehensive approach to health accounting within the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study 2016, we generated improved estimates of alcohol use and alcohol-attributable deaths and disability-adjusted lifeyears (DALYs) for 195 locations from 1990 to 2016, for both sexes and for 5-year age groups between the ages of 15 years and 95 years and older. Methods Using 694 data sources of individual and population-level alcohol consumption, along with 592 prospective and retrospective studies on the risk of alcohol use, we produced estimates of the prevalence of current drinking, abstention, the distribution of alcohol consumption among current drinkers in standard drinks daily (defined as 10 g of pure ethyl alcohol), and alcohol-attributable deaths and DALYs. We made several methodological improvements compared with previous estimates: first, we adjusted alcohol sales estimates to take into account tourist and unrecorded consumption; second, we did a new meta-analysis of relative risks for 23 health outcomes associated with alcohol use; and third, we developed a new method to quantify the level of alcohol consumption that minimises the overall risk to individual health. Findings Globally, alcohol use was the seventh leading risk factor for both deaths and DALYs in 2016, accounting for 2·2% (95% uncertainty interval [UI] 1·5­3·0) of age-standardised female deaths and 6·8% (5·8­8·0) of agestandardised male deaths. Among the population aged 15­49 years, alcohol use was the leading risk factor globally in 2016, with 3·8% (95% UI 3·2­4·3) of female deaths and 12·2% (10·8­13·6) of male deaths attributable to alcohol use. For the population aged 15­49 years, female attributable DALYs were 2·3% (95% UI 2·0­2·6) and male attributable DALYs were 8·9% (7·8­9·9). The three leading causes of attributable deaths in this age group were tuberculosis (1·4% [95% UI 1·0­1·7] of total deaths), road injuries (1·2% [0·7­1·9]), and self-harm (1·1% [0·6­1·5]). For populations aged 50 years and older, cancers accounted for a large proportion of total alcohol-attributable deaths in 2016, constituting 27·1% (95% UI 21·2­33·3) of total alcohol-attributable female deaths and 18·9% (15·3­22·6) of male deaths. The level of alcohol consumption that minimised harm across health outcomes was zero (95% UI 0·0­0·8) standard drinks per week. Lancet 2018; 392: 1015­35 Published Online August 23, 2018 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ S0140-6736(18)31310-2 This online publication has been corrected. The corrected version first appeared at thelancet.com on September 27, 2018, and further corrections were made on June 20, 2019 Correspondence to: Prof Emmanuela Gakidou, Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98121, USA gakidou@uw.edu Interpretation Alcohol use is a leading risk factor for global disease burden and causes substantial health loss. We found that the risk of all-cause mortality, and of cancers specifically, rises with increasing levels of consumption, and the level of consumption that minimises health loss is zero. These results suggest that alcohol control policies might need to be revised worldwide, refocusing on efforts to lower overall population-level consumption. Funding Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Introduction Alcohol use has a complex association with health. Researchers have recognised alcohol use as a leading risk factor for disease burden, and studies link its consumption to 60 acute and chronic diseases.1­3 Additionally, some research suggests that low levels of alcohol consumption can have a protective effect on ischaemic heart disease, diabetes, and several other outcomes.4­6 This finding remains an open question, and recent studies have challenged this view by use of mendelian randomisation and meta-analyses.7­10 Determination of harm due to alcohol use is com plicated further by the multiple mechanisms through which alcohol use affects health: through cumulative consumption leading to adverse effects on organs and tissues; by acute intoxication leading to injuries or poisoning; and by dependent drinking leading to impairments and potentially self-harm or violence. These effects are also influenced by an individual's consumption volume and pattern of drinking.2 Measuring the health effects of alcohol use requires careful consideration of all these factors. Research in context Evidence before this study Although researchers recognise alcohol use as a leading risk factor for premature death and disability, some evidence suggests that low intake might have a protective effect on specific conditions such as ischaemic heart disease and diabetes. Monitoring of consumption behaviour is required to analyse the health effects of alcohol use. Historically, researchers have relied on self-reported survey data to estimate consumption levels and trends. However, these data have systematic biases that make cross-country comparisons unreliable. The Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health, as well as previous iterations of the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study, have sought to produce harmonised, cross-country comparisons of alcohol consumption and its harms, by leveraging data on alcohol sales, the prevalence of current drinking and abstention, and self-reports of consumption amounts. Added value of this study In this analysis we improved available estimates of alcohol use and its associated health burden in five ways. First, we consolidated 694 individual and population-level data sources to estimate alcohol consumption levels among current drinkers. Second, we developed a method to adjust population-level consumption for alcohol consumed by tourists. Third, we improved pre-existing methods that account for unrecorded population-level consumption. Fourth, we did a new systematic review and meta-analysis of alcohol use and 23 associated health outcomes, which we used to estimate new dose­response curves of relative risk. Fifth, using the new relative risk curves and a new analytical method, we estimated the exposure of alcohol consumption that minimises an individual's total attributable risk. Implications of all the available evidence The total attributable burden of alcohol use was larger than previous evidence has indicated and increases monotonically with consumption. Based on weighted relative risk curves for each health outcome associated with alcohol use, the level of consumption that minimises health loss due to alcohol use is zero. These findings strongly suggest that alcohol control policies should aim to reduce total population-level consumption. To potentially reduce the effects of alcohol use on future health loss, there is a need for countries to revisit their alcohol control policies and assess how they can be modified to further lower population-level consumption. Several studies have attempted to address these factors to provide global estimates of alcohol consumption and its associated health effects. The most comprehensive among these studies have been WHO's Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health, as well as previous iterations of the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD).11­13 The present study aims to build upon pre-existing work and to address several limitations found in earlier research. First, the available studies have assessed the risk of alcohol use by relying on external meta-analyses, which do not control for confounding in the selection of the reference category within constituent studies. This approach is problematic because of the so-called sick quitter hypothesis, which emphasises the importance of reference category selection in correctly assessing risk among drinkers, along with other confounding study characteristics such as survival bias.8,14­17 Until recently, most meta-analyses of alcohol consumption have not controlled for the composition of the reference category. Subsequently, assessments of harm relying on these studies have been biased. We sought to resolve this issue within our meta-analyses by including controls for different reference categories and the average age of participants. Second, previous studies have used sales data to estimate population-level alcohol stock. Researchers have noted the benefit of using sales data instead of survey data for quantifying alcohol stock available within a location.18,19 However, sales data still have bias because of consumption by tourists and unrecorded consumption from illicit sales, home brewing, and local beverages. Without correction for these factors, estimates relying on sales data can be biased and lead to inaccurate cross-national comparisons. In the current study, we adjusted the estimates of populationlevel alcohol stock to account for the effects of tourism and unrecorded consumption. Third, previous studies have assumed zero as the counterfactual exposure level that minimises harm. Within a comparative risk assessment approach, a counterfactual level of consumption that minimises harm is required to estimate population attributable fractions (PAFs).1 However, this counterfactual level needs to be estimated, rather than assumed, given the complexities involved in estimating the risk of alcohol use across outcomes. Relying on this assumption can fail to capture any potential nonlinear effects between alcohol use and health. Our study proposes a new method for the use of available evidence to establish a counterfactual level of exposure across varied relative risks, which provides tangible evidence for low-risk drinking recommendations. In the present study, we aimed to address these limita tions and provide the best available estimates of alcohol use and the associated health burden. We estimated the Figure 1: Age-standardised prevalence of current drinking for females (A) and males (B) in 2016, in 195 locations Current drinkers are defined as individuals who reported having consumed alcohol within the past 12 months. ATG=Antigua and Barbuda. VCT=Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Isl=Islands. FSM=Federated States of Micronesia. LCA=Saint Lucia. TTO=Trinidad and Tobago. TLS=Timor-Leste. A Females Current drinker prevalence (%) 0­19·9 20·0­39·9 40·0­59·9 60·0­79·9 80·0­100·0 The Caribbean B Males ATG VCT Barbados Comoros West Africa Eastern Mediterranean Dominica Grenada Maldives Mauritius Malta LCA TTO TLS Seychelles Persian Gulf Singapore Balkan Peninsula Marshall Isl Kiribati Solomon Isl FSM Vanuatu Samoa Fiji Tonga Current drinker prevalence (%) 0­19·9 20·0­39·9 40·0­59·9 60·0­79·9 80·0­100·0 The Caribbean ATG VCT Barbados Comoros West Africa Eastern Mediterranean Dominica Grenada Maldives Mauritius Malta LCA TTO TLS Seychelles Persian Gulf Singapore Balkan Peninsula Marshall Isl Kiribati Solomon Isl FSM Vanuatu Samoa Fiji Tonga A Females Population average of standard drinks daily <1·00 3·01­4·00 1·01­2·00 4·01­5·00 2·01­3·00 >5·00 The Caribbean B Males ATG VCT Barbados Comoros West Africa Eastern Mediterranean Dominica Grenada Maldives Mauritius Malta LCA TTO TLS Seychelles Persian Gulf Singapore Balkan Peninsula Marshall Isl Kiribati Solomon Isl FSM Vanuatu Samoa Fiji Tonga Population average of standard drinks daily <1·00 3·01­4·00 1·01­2·00 4·01­5·00 2·01­3·00 >5·00 The Caribbean ATG VCT Barbados Comoros West Africa Eastern Mediterranean Dominica Grenada Maldives Mauritius Malta LCA TTO TLS Seychelles Persian Gulf Singapore Balkan Peninsula Marshall Isl Kiribati Solomon Isl FSM Vanuatu Samoa Fiji Tonga prevalence of current drinking (having one or more drinks in the past year); abstention from alcohol (having no alcohol in the past year); the distribution of alcohol consumption among current drinkers in standard drinks daily; and the disease burden attributable to alcohol use, in terms of deaths and disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs). We produced these estimates for 195 locations from 1990 to 2016, for both sexes and for 5-year age groups between the ages of 15 years and 95 years and older. We also did a new meta-analysis to assess the dose­ response risk of alcohol consumption for 23 outcomes. Lastly, we estimated the level of alcohol consumption that minimises an individual's total attributable risk of any health loss. Methods Study design This study follows the comparative risk assessment framework developed in previous iterations of GBD.20 In the following sections, we summarise our methods and briefly present innovations. A full explanation is available in appendix 1. This study fully adheres to the Guidelines for Accurate and Transparent Health Estimates Reporting (GATHER) statement.21 We estimated alcohol use exposure as grams of pure ethanol consumed daily by current drinkers (which we present here in terms of standard drinks daily, defined as 10 g of pure ethyl alcohol). We estimated relative risks by dose in grams of pure ethyl alcohol, for each included risk­outcome pair. We ascertained which cause and injury outcomes to include by reviewing prospective and observational studies of alcohol use, and then assessing the causal association using Bradford-Hill's criteria for causation.22 We included 23 outcomes, and the full list of risk­outcome pairs, as well as the corresponding data sources, are provided in appendix 1 (pp 52­140). Data sources We found sources that included indicators of current drinking prevalence and alcohol consumed in grams per day using the Global Health Data Exchange (GHDx) and PubMed.23 For the meta-analysis, we searched PubMed, the GHDx, and references of previously published metaanalyses. For our exposure estimates, we extracted 121029 data points from 694 sources across all exposure indicators. For our relative risk estimates, we extracted 3992 relative risk estimates across 592 studies. These relative risk estimates corresponded to a combined study population of 28 million individuals and 649000 registered Figure 2: Average standard drinks (10 g of pure ethanol per serving) consumed per day, age-standardised, for females (A) and males (B) in 2016, in 195 locations ATG=Antigua and Barbuda. VCT=Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Isl=Islands. FSM=Federated States of Micronesia. LCA=Saint Lucia. TTO=Trinidad and Tobago. TLS=Timor-Leste. cases of respective outcomes. We list all the included data sources in appendix 1 (pp 52­140). To estimate standard drinks consumed daily by current drinkers, we followed the general approach used by Rehm and colleagues.18 We briefly explain this method here, along with two methodological innovations to account for bias in the sales model: an adjustment to account for tourist consumption and an updated adjustment for unrecorded consumption. A full explanation of this approach is available in appendix 1 (pp 18­49). To estimate exposure, we combined estimates of population-level alcohol stock and individual-level alcohol consumption to produce standard drinks consumed daily among current drinkers and current drinker prevalence, within a specific location, year, age group, and sex. We started by estimating population-level alcohol stock in litres per capita from sales data, individual-level estimates of the prevalence of current drinkers and abstainers from survey data, and individual-level estimates of the amount of alcohol consumed in grams per day from survey data. Then, for a given location and year, we rescaled age-specific and sex-specific estimates of individual-level consumption so that they aggregated to the estimates of population-level consumption. When surveys reported amount consumed in terms of beverage types, we converted these data into grams of pure ethanol using density equations and assumptions of the average alcohol content by drink type (appendix 1, p 50). Finally, we rescaled estimates of current drinking and abstention so that, within a given location, year, age group, and sex, the two estimates summed to one. After we derived our model of population-level alcohol stock from sales data, we controlled for sources of bias that could arise from tourism and unrecorded con sumption not recorded in formal sales. To account for tourist consumption, we computed an additive measure for alcohol consumed abroad by domestic citizens and subtractive measures for alcohol consumed domestically by tourists. We extracted data on the number of tourists by country of origin and destination from the World Tourism Organization and used these data to obtain estimates of total tourists, percentage of tourists by location, and average duration of stay using a spatio temporal Gaussian process regression.24 We combined these estimates with measures of alcohol in litres per capita by location, to calculate net amounts of total population-level alcohol stock consumed by tourists or domestic citizens travelling abroad. To account for alcohol stock not captured within formal alcohol sales data (ie, unrecorded consumption from illicit production, home brewing, local beverages, or alcohol sold as a non-alcohol product), we collated estimates across published studies of the percentage of total alcohol stock due to unrecorded consumption. We sampled 1000 times from a uniform distribution with a range between zero and the average of these collated studies by location (sampling from the uncertainty interval from each study, then averaging the draws) to See Online for appendix 1 For more on the Global Health Data Exchange see http://ghdx. healthdata.org/ generate a conservative estimate of the total stock likely to be unrecorded. We used a conservative approach because of the wide heterogeneity in both the methods and estimates within included data sources. We provide estimates of these percentages in appendix 1 (pp 46­49). For more on the US Fatality Analysis Reporting System see https://www.nhtsa.gov/researchdata/fatality-analysis-reporting- system-fars Systematic review and meta-analysis We did a new systematic review for each associated outcome to incorporate new findings on risk and to improve upon existing approaches. This strategy allowed us to systematically control for reference category con founding in constituent studies across associated out comes. We provide the search strategy, search diagrams, dose­response curves for each included outcome, and references for each outcome in appendix 1 (pp 57­146). Drawing from our systematic review, we did a metaanalysis of risk outcomes for alcohol use. For each outcome, we estimated the dose­response relative risk curve using mixed-effects logistic regression with nonlinear splines for doses between 0 and 12·5 standard drinks daily. We selected 12·5 standard drinks daily as a cutoff point given the absence of available data beyond this range. We present additional details of the model in appendix 1 (pp 51­138). We tested the significance of including a study-level confounding variable on the composition of the reference category (eg, whether former drinkers were included in the abstainer category or not). When found to be significant, this variable was included as a predictor within the model, which was the case for ischaemic heart disease, ischaemic stroke, and diabetes. Using our dose­response curves, we estimated the consumption level that minimises harm, which is defined in the comparative risk assessment approach as the theoretical minimum risk exposure level (TMREL). We chose a theoretical minimum on the basis of a weighted average relative risk curve across all attributable outcomes. We constructed weights for each risk outcome based on the respective global, age-standardised DALY rate per 100000 in 2016 for both sexes. Our TMREL was the minimum of this weighted all-attributable outcome dose­response curve. See Online for appendix 2 Attributable burden due to alcohol use We calculated PAFs using our estimates of exposure, relative risks, and TMREL, following the same approach taken within the GBD studies.20 For alcohol-use disorders, which are by definition fully attributable, we assumed a PAF of 1.24 Following this calculation, we multiplied PAFs by outcome-specific estimates of deaths and DALYs