Title: Effect of breakfast on weight and energy intake: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.

Source: BMJ. 2019 Jan 30;364:l42. doi: 10.1136/bmj.l42.

Effect of breakfast on weight and energy intake: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials Katherine Sievert,1 Sultana Monira Hussain,1 Matthew J Page,2 Yuanyuan Wang,1 Harrison J Hughes,1 Mary Malek,1 Flavia M Cicuttini1 1Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia 2Research Methodology Division, School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia Correspondence to: F M Cicuttini flavia.cicuttini@monash.edu (ORCID 0000-0002-8200-1618) Additional material is published online only. To view please visit the journal online. Cite this as: BMJ 2019;364:l42 http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l42 Accepted: 29 November 2018 ABSTRACT OBJECTIVE To examine the effect of regular breakfast consumption on weight change and energy intake in people living in high income countries. DESIGN Systematic review and meta-analysis. DATA SOURCES PubMed, Ovid Medline, and CINAHL were searched for randomised controlled trials published between January 1990 and January 2018 investigating the effect of breakfast on weight or energy intake. ClinicalTrials.gov and the World Health Organization's International Clinical Trials Registry Platform search portal were also searched in October 2018 to identify any registered yet unpublished or ongoing trials. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING STUDIES Randomised controlled trials from high income countries in adults comparing breakfast consumption with no breakfast consumption that included a measure of body weight or energy intake. Two independent reviewers extracted the data and assessed the risk of bias of included studies. Random effects meta-analyses of the effect of breakfast consumption on weight and daily energy intake were performed. RESULTS Of 13 included trials, seven examined the effect of eating breakfast on weight change, and 10 examined the effect on energy intake. Meta-analysis of the results found a small difference in weight favouring participants who skipped breakfast (mean difference 0.44 kg, 95% confidence interval 0.07 to 0.82), but there was some inconsistency across trial results (I2=43%). Participants assigned to breakfast had a WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC Many observational studies have suggested that regular breakfast consumption is associated with low body mass index and is a protective factor against weight gain Evidence from randomised controlled trials of breakfast consumption has been inconsistent WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS Modification of diets to include consumption of breakfast might not be a good strategy for weight loss, regardless of established breakfast habit Caution is needed when recommending breakfast for weight loss in adults, as it could have the opposite effect As the quality of the included studies was mostly low, the findings should be interpreted with caution; more high quality trials of longer duration are needed to examine the role of breakfast eating in an overall weight management approach higher total daily energy intake than those assigned to skip breakfast (mean difference 259.79 kcal/day, 78.87 to 440.71; 1 kcal=4.18 kJ), despite substantial inconsistency across trial results (I2=80%). All of the included trials were at high or unclear risk of bias in at least one domain and had only short term follow-ups (mean period seven weeks for weight, two weeks for energy intake). As the quality of the included studies was mostly low, the findings should be interpreted with caution. CONCLUSION This study suggests that the addition of breakfast might not be a good strategy for weight loss, regardless of established breakfast habit. Caution is needed when recommending breakfast for weight loss in adults, as it could have the opposite effect. Further randomised controlled trials of high quality are needed to examine the role of breakfast eating in the approach to weight management. STUDY REGISTRATION PROSPERO registration number CRD42017057687. Introduction Obesity is considered to be one of the defining health issues of this time and is recognised as the most prevalent form of malnutrition worldwide, with rapidly increasing rates globally.1 The association of obesity with increased risk of chronic diseases (eg, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and osteoarthritis) means that it is the major contributor to the global burden of disease.2-4 In high income countries, weight gain is rising in incidence across all population groups, thus efforts to manage the effects of this problem have been undertaken by government and public health organisations. Although strategies aimed at prevention and management of obesity must be multifactorial, many international dietary recommendations suggest the regular inclusion of breakfast for weight management and as a protective factor against obesity (table 1). These recommendations are often derived from the presumption that skipping breakfast leads to energy overcompensation later in the day.11 Furthermore, it is postulated that the satiating properties of food over the course of the day decline12 and, therefore, eating earlier in the day could promote greater satiety than eating later in the day. However, despite this common recommendation for weight control by both health professionals13 14 and the lay community,15-17 most of these recommendations are based on the findings of observational studies.18-21 These concepts have potential for selection bias and confounding, because those individuals who eat breakfast might differ Table 1 | International recommendations for breakfast in 2010-18 Country Source Recommendation United Kingdom5 6 Australia7 United States8 Ireland9 New Zealand10 British Dietetic Association (2016) and Eatwell Guide (2016): https://www.bda.uk.com/foodfacts/ healthy_breakfast, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ attachment_data/file/742750/Eatwell_Guide_booklet_2018v4.pdf "Skipping breakfast won't help you lose weight. You could miss out on essential nutrients and you may end up snacking more throughout the day because you feel hungry." Dieticians Association of Australia (2013): https://daa.asn.au/resource/breakfast-cereals-and-body- "Research shows that consuming breakfast regularly weight-fact-sheet/ is associated with lower levels of overweight and obesity. Breakfast fills you up, meaning you are less likely to experience hunger pangs throughout day and resort to snacking on high energy, high fat foods." Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: adult weight management (2014): https://www.andeal.org/vault/ "The majority of observational research reported that pq132.pdf breakfast consumption is associated with a lower BMI and decreased obesity risk, while omitting breakfast is associated with a higher BMI and increased obesity risk. Several studies suggest that cereal-based breakfasts are associated with lower BMI, while breakfasts that are very high in energy are associated with higher BMI" Food Safety Authority of Ireland: scientific recommendations for healthy eating guidelines (2011), p58: "[When watching weight] Never skip meals; breakfast https://www.fsai.ie/recommendationsforhealthyeatingguidelinesinireland.html is especially important" Food and nutrition guidelines for healthy children and young people (2015): www.health.govt.nz/ "Breakfast consumption is associated with a range of publication/food-and-nutrition-guidelines-healthy-children-and-young-people-aged-2-18-years-back- positive outcomes, including better nutrient intake ground-paper and a healthy body weight." BMI=body mass index. from those who do not in several ways, including socioeconomic status and the adoption of other health related behaviours such as the consumption of a healthy diet. A recent study has challenged the presumption of breakfast and weight control by examining the findings of two randomised controlled trials that showed no effect on weight.22 Additionally, recent results from several randomised controlled trials do not generally support a Visual Abstract Systematic review and meta-analysis Breakfast and weight loss Reviewing the effects of breakfast consumption on body weight and energy intake Addition of breakfast might not be a good strategy for weight loss, regardless of established breakfast habit beneficial effect of breakfast eating on weight loss.23 24 Recommending regular breakfast consumption could adversely affect weight control by adding calories to diets, especially in older people with established eating behaviours, because past food habits are important predictors of current food habits.25 Thus, the aims of this review were to examine the evidence from randomised controlled clinical trials of the effect of regular breakfast consumption on weight change (weight loss/weight gain), and daily energy intake in people living in high income countries. Methods Our systematic review was reported in accordance with the 2009 PRISMA statement.26 Our review protocol was registered with PROSPERO in February 2017 (registration number CRD42017057687). unique studies identi ed Studied changes Studied h in body weight energy intake Study All studies were at high risk of bias, mostly because quality of lack of blinding, for both allocation and analysis Parallel group trials Weight gain (kg) Daily energy (kJ) - - - days Betts Chowdhury Dhurandar a Dhurandar b Positive values Geliebter a Geliebter b favour no breakfast LeCheminant Schlundt a Schlundt b Astbury Clayton Crossover Farshchi trials Levitsky Reeves Yosimura Overall Read the full article online: http://bit.ly/BMJbreakfast © BMJ Publishing group Ltd. Search strategy We searched for articles indexed in PubMed, Ovid Medline, and CINAHL that were published between January 1990 and January 2018 (search strategy available in supplementary table 1). The search was limited to adult human studies published in the English language. The reference lists of recent reviews and included studies were screened for additional references. We also searched ClinicalTrials.gov and the World Health Organization's International Clinical Trials Registry Platform search portal in October 2018 to identify any registered yet unpublished or ongoing randomised controlled trials. In both trials registers, we used only one search term: "breakfast." Study selection, inclusion and exclusion criteria We included randomised controlled trials in adults that compared breakfast consumption with no breakfast consumption or skipping breakfast and included a measure of either self reported or measured body doi: 10.1136/bmj.l42|BMJ 2019;364:l42 | thebmj weight or energy intake. Studies had to have reported at least one of these primary outcomes. Owing to the varying nature of breakfast definitions, only studies that defined breakfast according to content or timing were included. We excluded studies if they compared breakfast content without assessing the role of breakfast on weight management, change in weight, or energy intake. Moreover, studies conducted in children or adolescents, or in populations with comorbidities other than overweight or obesity such as diabetes or binge eating disorder, were also excluded. We set a 28 year search limit because eating patterns more than 30 years ago are likely to have changed considerably from patterns in the past few decades, in accordance with natural changes in population dietary patterns.27 We chose to include studies conducted in high income country settings as defined by the World Bank definition of high income,28 because dietary habits vary immensely across resource limited settings. KS did the search while SMH adjudicated. Two authors (KS and Cate Lombard) independently screened all titles and abstracts and retrieved the full text of any article considered definitely or possibly eligible. Both authors then reviewed the full text articles against the eligibility criteria. Any disagreement between the two authors was resolved by discussion. Data extraction Data on the characteristics of the included studies were extracted independently by pairs of reviewers (KS and YW or HJH), including (1) study design, study population, number of participants, mean age and percentage of female participants; (2) intervention details; (3) energy consumption; (4) outcome measures and weight measurement; and (5) study results for weight loss and energy intake. A third reviewer (SMH or MJP) checked the extracted data for any errors. If data were not available in numerical format, we estimated it from figures using WebPlotDigitizer.29 Risk of bias assessment Pairs of authors (KS and MJP or MM) independently assessed the risk of bias of each included trial. Any disagreements were discussed between the two authors, and another author (FMC) gave a final judgment if no consensus could be reached. Trials were assessed using Cochrane's tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials.30 The tool includes the following domains: random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of participants and personnel, blinding of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other sources of bias. We rated each domain as low risk, unclear risk, or high risk of bias. We classified the overall risk of bias as low if all domains were at low risk of bias, as high if at least one domain was at high risk of bias, or as unclear if at least one domain was at unclear risk of bias and no domain was at high risk. This rule is specified by the Cochrane tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised controlled trials, because any source of bias in a trial is problematic and there is a paucity of empirical research to prioritise one domain over the other.30 Data analysis Results for all outcomes were expressed as mean differences with 95% confidence intervals, calculated from either end of treatment values or change from baseline values. Across the trials, results for weight were always presented in kilograms, whereas results for total daily energy intake were presented as kilocalories per day, kilojoules per day, or megajoules per day. Where required, we converted means and standard deviations for total daily energy intake into kilocalories per day (kcal/day; 1 kcal=4.18 kJ=0.00418 MJ). We included several crossover trials that did not present results of a paired analysis, and that did not report correlations between baseline and end of study data, thereby ignoring within-person variation. We reanalysed the data from these studies assuming different correlation coefficients when estimating the standard error of the mean difference, using formulas provided in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions.31 We included in metaanalyses the results based on the most conservative approach, assuming a correlation coefficient of 0.3, and conducted sensitivity analyses assuming the following correlation coefficients: 0.5, 0.7, and 0.9. For any multiarm trials identified (eg, comparing breakfast A v breakfast B v no breakfast), we included each pairwise comparison in the meta-analysis (that is, breakfast A v no breakfast, and breakfast B v no breakfast) by dividing the control group sample size in half. We synthesised estimates of mean difference using a random effects meta-analysis model, based on the assumption that clinical and methodological heterogeneity was likely to exist and to have an effect on the results. We used the DerSimonian and Laird method of moments estimator to estimate the between-study variance, and calculated 95% confidence intervals using the Wald type method.32 Statistical inconsistency was quantified by use of the I2 statistic.33 We generated contour enhanced funnel plots to investigate small study effects (the tendency for intervention effects estimated in smaller studies to differ from those estimated in larger studies, which can result from reporting biases, methodological or clinical heterogeneity, or other factors).34 All analyses were conducted using the metan and confunnel packages in Stata version 14.35 Patient and public involvement Although this research contained no direct patient or public involvement, the research question was informed by work with a consumer organisation identifying patient needs in musculoskeletal disease36 and an audit of consumer with knee and hip pain to identify health beliefs in weight management.37 Results Search results The search of the three electronic databases identified 1868 records with 604 articles remaining after the removal of duplicates. Of these, 552 articles were excluded after screening titles and then abstracts, because these studies did not meet selection criteria (eg, did not include breakfast intake as an intervention, did not focus on adult participants, or were reviews or conference papers). Of the 52 retrieved articles, 39 studies were excluded after full text review because they were not a randomised controlled trial, weight or energy intake was not measured as an outcome, and the intervention was not breakfast consumption. Thus 13 trials were identified as eligible for inclusion in the review (fig 1).23 24 38-48 From our searches of trials registers, we identified five ongoing trials that are potentially eligible for inclusion in a future update of our review (register numbers NCT03134014, NCT02093572, NCT03257059, NCT03146442, and NCT03031132). Seven trials examined the relation between breakfast consumption or omission and changes in body weight (n=486), and 10 trials examined the effect of breakfast consumption on 24 hour energy intake (n=930). Characteristics of included trials The characteristics of the included trials are presented in table 2. Most trials were carried out in the United States24 41 43 44 46 47 and the United Kingdom.23 38-40 42 45 One trial was from Japan.48 Five trials included participants specifically with overweight or obesity23 41 43 46 47; the remaining trials included people with any weight range, including normal body weight, overweight, and obesity.24 38 39 40 42 44 45 48 Most of the included participants were community based,23 24 39 40 41 43 45-48 with the exception of two trials that included hospital workers38 42 and one trial that included university students.44 Assessment of intervention: breakfast eating We saw methodological variations across the trials with regards to the breakfast consumption intervention. Six trials collected data on breakfast consumption by direct monitoring of breakfast intake at laboratory visits,38 40 42-44 47 with the remaining seven studies using self administered intake in the form of seven day food diaries or other recall methods.23 24 39 41 45 46 48 Weight and energy intake were measured objectively at study visits in 11 studies23 24 38-44 46 47; the remaining two studies measured outcomes through participant self report.45 48 Duration of intervention ranged from two42 to 16 weeks41 when examining the effect on weight 828 Pubmed 1990 ­ Jan 2018 306 Ovid Medline 1990 ­ Jan 2018 734 CINAHL 1990 ­ Jan 2018 604 Records aer duplicates removed 604 Records identi ed by screening titles/abstracts 552 Excluded abstract/conference and review papers, where intervention was not breakfast and focused on non-adult populations 52 Full text articles assessed for eligibility 39 Excluded 5 Weight not included as outcome 5 Not skipping breakfast 4 Not in high income country 25 Not randomised controlled trial 13 Studies included in analysis 12 Studies included in meta-analysis Fig 1 | PRISMA flow diagram of included articles doi: 10.1136/bmj.l42|BMJ 2019;364:l42 | thebmj Table 2 | General characteristics of included studies Author (country, Baseline participant characteristics year of publi Age (years; cation) No of participants Population (BMI; mean (SD)) mean (SD)*) Intervention group Control group Assessment of Outcome exposure measures Duration of study Astbury (UK, 2011)38 12 (0% female) Healthy hospital workers (students and staff; 23.5 (1.7)) 23.4 (7.3) Breakfast arm: participants were asked to consume Rice Krispies (Kelloggs) and semi-skimmed milk at 7 45 am. After 150 min, a liquid pre-load meal was given. Lunch meal was provided 90 min later. No breakfast arm: only pre-load and lunch meal provided. Direct visual monitoring Energy intake 7 days Betts (UK, 2014)39 Chowdhury (UK, 2016)23 33 (64% female) 23 (65% female) Healthy normal and overweight community dwelling adults (24.4 (22)) Healthy obese community dwellers (33 (4.9)) 36 (11) 44 (10)